Claudia Romeo: Olá from Portugal!
We are in Matosinhos, a town nearby Porto.
We are at Conservas Pinhais,
which is one of the
oldest preserving
factories here in Portugal
and one of the few that
still cans sardines
the traditional, artisanal way.
Today we're going to
learn how this small fish
got such a big cult following.
We're going to see how sardines are canned
here at Pinhais and
taste a few to understand
what sets this artisanal method apart.
If you travel to Portugal,
chances are you will come back home
with an array of souvenirs
in the shape of sardines.
And during the country's
festivities in June,
13 sardines are eaten every second.
The country has a long
fish-canning tradition,
to the point that the sardine
has become a national icon.
But why?
Claudia: Canning itself did
not originate in Portugal.
It was a French
confectioner, Nicolas Appert,
who first successfully
preserved foods with the method.
He found his way to
fame in the early 1800s
after presenting his inventions
to French emperor Napoleon,
who was looking for a new
food-preserving method
to feed his army.
After Appert's discovery was made public,
canning quickly became popular.
With Portugal's extensive coastline
and an abundance of fish,
it wasn't hard for the
country to jump on the trend,
and by 1925 it counted
about 400 canneries.
Claudia: An important
fishing port already,
Matosinhos became a hub
for the canning industry.
Claudia: After the war, the
industry gradually declined.
In 2013, Portugal counted
only 20 fish-preserving factories.
Many factors contributed to this decline.
The replacement of
high-quality ingredients
with cheaper raw material, climate change,
fishing regulations due
to diminishing stock,
and the automation of the canning process.
Founded in 1920, Pinhais
is one of Portugal's
last surviving preserving factories.
Claudia: Pinhais makes four
types of canned sardines:
sardines in olive oil,
sardines in tomato sauce,
spiced sardines in olive oil,
and sardines in spiced tomato sauce.
We followed the making of
sardines in tomato sauce
and the spiced sardines in olive oil.
These are the fresh sardines
that have arrived this morning
from Matosinhos harbor,
and the canning process
will take place in one day,
so everything is gonna be finished
by 5 p.m. this afternoon.
All the sardines are gonna be tinned.
Now it's time to go and see
how sardines are actually
canned here at Pinhais.
After the sardines arrive at the factory,
they are placed on a marble table,
and the head and bowel of
the fish are cut off by hand.
Then they are brined
for about half an hour.
The sardines are placed
on grids that are handmade
by Senhor Albino in his
workshop at the factory.
Then the sardines are rinsed
to remove salt and steamed.
Claudia: All the ingredients
are cut during the day
and added by hand, one by one.
Each can of spiced sardines
has one pinch of black pepper,
carrot, laurel, piri-piri,
clove, and cucumber.
Senhora Emilia is in
charge of the tomato sauce,
and she keeps her recipe secret.
The fish are canned in tinplate tins,
then washed and sterilized.
These are the only two
machines at the factory.
These two ladies are in
charge of quality control.
They do that by listening carefully
to the sound of each tin.
This is the sound of a good tin.
[tins clanking]
And this is a bad one.
Tins are stored for at
least three to six months.
Whenever a customer submits an order,
the cans are wrapped by hand.
Which, by the way, is not an easy job,
as I had the chance to wrap a can myself.
So, this one?
Employee: You've got more than one there.
First on the bottom.
Claudia: Oh, it's very slippery.
Employee: With this hand
and with this finger.
[laughing]
Claudia: Too much tape. A bit big, no?
Yeah, it's hard.
Obrigada.
So, we have finished our
tour here at Pinhais,
and now it's time for tasting.
We have sardines in tomato sauce
and sardines in spiced olive oil.
This is actually my very,
very, very first time
eating sardines out of a can.
Now it's sardines-in-tomato-sauce time.
I'm not good at opening cans.
This particular can was made in 2015.
It's four years ago.
Well, let's have a sardine.
Oh, it's so good.
[laughing]
Wow.
Wow, this is so good.
It's really amazing.
It tastes as sweet as tomatoes,
and the oil is incredible.
Just by this one bite I can
tell that it's good oil.
I have a bad memory of canned stuff
because I'm really scared of, like,
the strong taste of vinegar
or, like, very, very bad vegetable oil.
Whereas this is so fresh; it's so nice.
It reminds me of just, like,
my grandmother cooking tomato sauce.
She could have just, you
know, done it this morning
and this would be my lunch. Like, so good.
[laughs]
OK, well, let's try the spiced.
I'm not big fan of spices.
So. [laughs]
Let's see if this is
going to change my mind.
It's not the spice that I was expecting.
This one is a very subtle spice,
and also it tastes very, like, earthy.
I can taste the laurel straight away,
and that is interesting
because that's, like,
very, very, very tiny part.
Why haven't I been eating
sardines all this time?
[laughs]
It's so good.
Canning them, I think,
makes them even better.
Pinhais exports 90% of its
products all over the globe,
from Austria to the Caribbean.